---
title: Observers and computed properties
---

<!-- toc -->


Observers are methods invoked when [observable changes](#observable-changes) occur to the element's
data. There are two basic types of observers:


*   Simple observers observe a single property.
*   Complex observers can observe one or more properties *or paths*.

You use different syntax for declaring these two types of observers, but in most cases they function
the same way.

Computed properties are virtual properties based on one or more pieces of the element's data. A
computed property is generated by a computing function—essentially, a complex observer that returns
a value.

Unless otherwise specified, notes about observers apply to simple observers, complex observers, and
computed properties.

### Observers are synchronous

Like all property effects, observers are synchronous. If the observer is likely to be invoked
frequently, consider deferring time-consuming work, like inserting or removing DOM. For example, you
can use the [`async`](/1.0/docs/api/Polymer.Base#method-async) method to defer work, or use the
[`debounce`](/1.0/docs/api/Polymer.Base#method-debounce) method to ensure that a task is only run
once during a given time period.

However, if you handle a data change asynchronously, note that the change data may be out of date by
the time you handle it.


## Simple observers {#simple-observers}

Simple observers are declared in the `properties` object, and always observe a single property. You
shouldn't assume any particular initialization order for properties: if your observer depends on
multiple properties being initialized, use a complex observer instead.

Simple observers are fired the first time the property becomes defined (!= `undefined`), and on
every change thereafter, *_even if the property becomes undefined._*

Simple observers only fire when the property *itself* changes. They don't fire on subproperty
changes, or array mutation. If you need these changes, use a complex observer with a wildcard path,
as described in [Observe all changes related to a path](#deep-observation).

The observer method receives the new and old values of the property as arguments.

### Observe a property  {#change-callbacks}

Define a simple observer by adding an `observer` key to the property's declaration. The

Example: { .caption }

```
Polymer({

  is: 'x-custom',

  properties: {
    disabled: {
      type: Boolean,
      observer: '_disabledChanged'
    },
    highlight: {
      observer: '_highlightChanged'
    }
  },

  _disabledChanged: function(newValue, oldValue) {
    this.toggleClass('disabled', newValue);
    this.highlight = true;
  },

  _highlightChanged: function() {
    this.classList.add('highlight');
    this.async(function() {
      this.classList.remove('highlight');
    }, 300);
  }

});
```

**Warning:**
A single property observer shouldn't rely on any other properties,
sub-properties, or paths because the observer can be called while these
dependencies are undefined. See [Always include dependencies
as observer arguments](#dependencies) for details.
{ .alert .alert-warning }

## Complex observers {#complex-observers}

Complex observers are declared in the `observers` array, and can monitor one or more paths. These
paths are called the observer's *dependencies*.

```
observers: [
  'userListChanged(users.*, filter)'
]
```

Each dependency represents:

*   A specific property (for example, `firstName`).

*   A specific subproperty (for example, `address.street`).

*   Mutations on a specific array (for example, `users.splices`).

*   All subproperty changes and array mutations below a given path (for example, `users.*`).

The observer method is called with one argument for each dependency. The argument type varies
depending on the path being observed.


*   For simple property or subproperty dependencies, the argument is the new value of the property
    or subproperty.

*   For array mutation or wildcard paths, the argument is a *change record* describing the change.

Handling of undefined values **depends on the number of properties being observed:**


*   The initial call to a complex observer is deferred until *all* of the dependencies are *defined*
    (that is, they don't have the value `undefined`).

*   **For a single property observer**, the rules are identical to a simple observer: the observer
    is called *each time* an observable change is made to one of the dependencies, **even if the new
    value for the path is <code>undefined</code>.**


*   <strong>A multi-property observer</strong> is called <em>each time</em> an observable change is
    made to one of the dependencies, <strong><em>unless</em> the new value for one of the paths is
    <code>undefined</code>.</strong>

Complex observers should only depend on their declared dependencies.

Related task:

*   Observe multiple properties or paths
*   Observe array changes
*   Observe all changes to a path





### Observe changes to multiple properties {#multi-property-observers}

To observe changes to a set of properties, use the `observers`
array.

These observers differ from single-property observers in a few ways:

*   Observers are not invoked until all dependent properties are defined (`!== undefined`).
    So each dependent properties should have a default `value` defined in `properties` (or otherwise
    be initialized to a non-`undefined` value) to ensure the observer is called.
*   Observers do not receive `old` values as arguments, only new values.  Only single-property
    observers defined in the `properties` object receive both `old` and `new` values.

Example { .caption }

```
Polymer({

  is: 'x-custom',

  properties: {
    preload: Boolean,
    src: String,
    size: String
  },

  observers: [
    'updateImage(preload, src, size)'
  ],

  updateImage: function(preload, src, size) {
    // ... do work using dependent values
  }

});
```

In addition to properties, observers can also observe [paths to sub-properties](#observing-path-changes),
[paths with wildcards](#deep-observation), or [array changes](#array-observation).

### Observe sub-property changes {#observing-path-changes}

To observe changes in object sub-properties:

*   Define an `observers` array.
*   Add an item to the `observers` array. The item must be a method name
    followed by a comma-separated list of one or more paths. For example,
    `onNameChange(dog.name)` for one path, or
    `onNameChange(dog.name, cat.name)` for multiple paths. Each path is a
    sub-property that you want to observe.
*   Define the method in your element prototype. When the method is called,
    the argument to the method is the new value of the sub-property.

In order for Polymer to properly detect the sub-property change, the
sub-property must be updated in one of the following two ways:

*   Via a [property binding](data-binding#property-binding).
*   By calling [`set`](model-data#set-path).

Example: { .caption }

```
<dom-module id="x-sub-property-observer">
  <template>
    <!-- Sub-property is updated via property binding. -->
    <input value="{{user.name::input}}">
  </template>
  <script>
    Polymer({
      is: 'x-sub-property-observer',
      properties: {
        user: {
          type: Object,
          value: function() {
            return {};
          }
        }
      },
      // Each item of observers array is a method name followed by
      // a comma-separated list of one or more paths.
      observers: [
        'userNameChanged(user.name)'
      ],
      // Each method referenced in observers must be defined in
      // element prototype. The argument to the method is the new value
      // of the sub-property.
      userNameChanged: function(name) {
        console.log('new name: ' + name);
      },
    });
  </script>
</dom-module>
```

### Observe array mutations {#array-observation}

Use an array mutation observer to call an observer function whenever an array
item is added or deleted using Polymer's [array mutation methods](model-data#array-mutation).
Whenever the array is mutated, the observer receives a change record
representing the mutation as a set of array splices.

In many cases, you'll want to observe both array mutations *and* changes to
sub-properties of array items, in which case you should use a wildcard path,
as described in [Observe all changes related to a path](#deep-observation).


**Avoid native JavaScript array mutation methods.**
Use Polymer's [array mutation methods](model-data#array-mutation) wherever possible to
ensure that elements with registered interest in the array mutations are
properly notified. If you can't avoid the native methods, you need to notify
Polymer about array changes as described in [Using native array mutation
methods](model-data#notifysplices).
{ .alert .alert-warning }

To create a splice observer, specify a path to an array followed by `.splices`
in your `observers` array.

``` js
observers: [
  'usersAddedOrRemoved(users.splices)'
]
```

Your observer method should accept a single argument. When your observer method
is called, it receives a change record of the mutations that
occurred on the array. Each change record provides the following property:

*   `indexSplices`. The set of changes that occurred to the array, in
     terms of array indexes. Each `indexSplices` record contains the following
     properties:

     -   `index`. Position where the splice started.
     -   `removed`. Array of `removed` items.
     -   `addedCount`. Number of new items inserted at `index`.
     -   `object`: A reference to the array in question.
     -   `type`: The string literal 'splice'.


**Change record may be undefined.** The change record may be undefined the first
time the observer is invoked, so your code should guard against this, as shown
in the example.
{ .alert .alert-info }

Example {.caption}

```
Polymer({

  is: 'x-custom',

  properties: {
    users: {
      type: Array,
      value: function() {
        return [];
      }
    }
  },

  observers: [
    'usersAddedOrRemoved(users.splices)'
  ],

  usersAddedOrRemoved: function(changeRecord) {
    if (changeRecord) {
      changeRecord.indexSplices.forEach(function(s) {
        s.removed.forEach(function(user) {
          console.log(user.name + ' was removed');
        });
        for (var i=0; i<s.addedCount; i++) {
          var index = s.index + i;
          var newUser = s.object[index];
          console.log('User ' + newUser.name + ' added at index ' + index);
        }
      }, this);
    }
  },
  ready: function() {
    this.push('users', {name: "Jack Aubrey"});
  },
});
```

#### Track key splices {#key-splices}

In some situtations, you may need to know about the [immutable opaque
keys](#key-paths) that Polymer uses to track array items. **This is an advanced
use case, only required if you're implementing an element like the [template
repeater](https://www.polymer-project.org/1.0/docs/devguide/templates.html#dom-repeat).**

You can register interest in key additions and deletions by retrieving the
array's `Collection` object:

<code>Polymer.Collection.get(<var>array</var>);</code>

If you've registered interest, the change record includes an additional property:

*   `keySplices`. The set of changes that occurred to the array in terms
    of array keys. Each `keySplices` record contains the following properties:

    -   `added`. Array of added keys.
    -   `removed`. Array of removed keys.

**Template repeaters and key splices.** The template repeater (`dom-repeat`)
element uses keys internally, so if an array is used by a `dom-repeat`,
observers for that array receive the `keySplices` property.
{.alert .alert-info}

### Observe all changes related to a path {#deep-observation}

To call an observer when any (deep) sub-property of an
object or array changes, specify a path with a wildcard (`*`).

When you specify a path with a wildcard, the argument passed to your
observer is a change record object with the following properties:

*   `path`. Path to the property that changed. Use this to determine whether
    a property changed, a sub-property changed, or an array was mutated.
*   `value`. New value of the path that changed.
*   `base`. The object matching the non-wildcard portion of the path.

For array mutations, `path` is the path to the array that changed,
followed by `.splices`. And the change record includes the `indexSplices` and
`keySplices` properties described in
[Observe array mutations](#array-observation).

Example: { .caption }

```
<dom-module id="x-deep-observer">
  <template>
    <input value="{{user.name.first::input}}"
           placeholder="First Name">
    <input value="{{user.name.last::input}}"
           placeholder="Last Name">
  </template>
  <script>
    Polymer({
      is: 'x-deep-observer',
      properties: {
        user: {
          type: Object,
          value: function() {
            return {'name':{}};
          }
        }
      },
      observers: [
        'userNameChanged(user.name.*)'
      ],
      userNameChanged: function(changeRecord) {
        console.log('path: ' + changeRecord.path);
        console.log('value: ' + changeRecord.value);
      },
    });
  </script>
</dom-module>
```

#### Deep sub-property changes on array items {#key-paths}

When a sub-property of an array is modified, `changeRecord.path` references
the "key" of the array item that was modified, not the array index. For
example:

```
console.log(changeRecord.path); // users.#0.name
```

`#0` signifies the key of this example array item. All keys are prefixed
with a number sign (`#`) by convention to distinguish them from array indexes.
Keys provide stable references to array items, regardless of any splices
(additions or removals) on the array.

Use the `get` method to retrieve an item by path.

```
var item = this.get('users.#0');
```

If you need a reference to the index of an array item, you
can retrieve it using `indexOf`:

```
var item = this.get('users.#0');
var index = this.users.indexOf(item);
```

The following example shows one way to use path manipulation and
`get` to retrieve an array item and its index from inside an observer:

```
// Log user name changes by index
usersChanged(cr) {
  // handle paths like 'users.#4.name'
  var nameSubpath = cr.path.indexOf('.name');
  if (nameSubpath) {
    var itempath = cr.path.substring(0, nameSubpath);
    var item = this.get(itempath);
    var index = cr.base.indexOf(item);
    console.log('Item ' + index + ' changed, new name is: ' + item.name);
  }
}
```


### Always include dependencies as observer arguments {#dependencies}

Observers shouldn't rely on any properties, sub-properties, or paths other
than those listed as arguments to the observer. This is because the observer
can be called while the other dependencies are still undefined. For example:

```
properties: {
  firstName: {
    type: String,
    observer: 'nameChanged'
  },
  lastName: {
    type: String
  }
},
// WARNING: ANTI-PATTERN! DO NOT USE
nameChanged: function(newFirstName, oldFirstName) {
  // this.lastName could be undefined!
  console.log('new name:', newFirstName, this.lastName);
}
```

Note that Polymer doesn't guarantee that properties are
initialized in any particular order.

In general, if your observer relies on multiple dependencies, use a
[multi-property observer](#multi-property-observers) and list every dependency
as an argument to the observer. This ensures that all dependencies are
defined before the observer is called.

```
properties: {
  firstName: {
    type: String
  },
  lastName: {
    type: String
  }
},
observers: [
  'nameChanged(firstName, lastName)'
],
nameChanged: function(firstName, lastName) {
  console.log('new name:', firstName, lastName);
}
```

If you must use a single property and must rely on other properties (for
example, if you need access to the old value of the observed property, which
you won't be able to access with a multi-property observer),
take the following precautions:

*   Check that all dependecies are defined
    (for example, `if this.lastName !== undefined`) before using them in your
    observer.
*   Set default values on the dependencies.

Keep in mind, however, that the observer is only called when one of the
dependencies listed in its arguments changes. For example, if an observer
relies on `this.firstName` but does not list it as an argument, the observer
is not called when `this.firstName` changes.

## Computed properties {#computed-properties}

Computed properties are virtual properties computed on the basis of one or more paths. The computing
function for a computed property follows the same rules as a complex observer, except that it
returns a value, which is used as the value of the computed property.

As with complex observers, the handling of `undefined` values **depends on the number of properties
being observed**. See the description of [Complex observers](#complex-observers) for details.

### Define a computed property

Polymer supports virtual properties whose values are calculated from other properties.

To define a computed property, add it to the `properties` object with a
`computed` key mapping to a computing function:

```
fullName: {
  type: String,
  computed: 'computeFullName(first, last)'
}
```


The function is provided as a string with dependent properties as arguments in parenthesis. The
function will be called once for any [observable change](data-system#observable-changes) to
the dependent properties.

As with complex observers, the handling of `undefined` values **depends on the number of properties
being observed**.

The computing function is not invoked until **all** dependent properties are defined
(`!== undefined`). So each dependent properties should have a
default `value` defined in `properties` (or otherwise be initialized to a
non-`undefined` value) to ensure the property is computed.

**Note:**
The definition of a computing function looks like the
definition of a [multi-property observer](#multi-property-observers),
and the two act almost identically. The only difference is that the
computed property function returns a value that's exposed as a virtual property.
{ .alert .alert-info }

```
<dom-module id="x-custom">

  <template>
    My name is <span>{{fullName}}</span>
  </template>

  <script>
    Polymer({

      is: 'x-custom',

      properties: {

        first: String,

        last: String,

        fullName: {
          type: String,
          // when `first` or `last` changes `computeFullName` is called once
          // and the value it returns is stored as `fullName`
          computed: 'computeFullName(first, last)'
        }

      },

      computeFullName: function(first, last) {
        return first + ' ' + last;
      }

    });
  </script>

</dom-module>
```

Arguments to computing functions may be simple properties on the element, as
well as any of the arguments types supported by `observers`, including [paths](#observing-path-changes),
[paths with wildcards](#deep-observation), and [paths to array splices](#array-observation).
The arguments received by the computing function match those described in the sections referenced above.

**Note:**
If you only need a computed property for a data binding, you
can use a computed binding instead. See
[Computed bindings](data-binding#annotated-computed).
{ .alert .alert-info }
