---
title: Data binding helper elements
---

<!-- toc -->

Polymer provides a set of custom elements to help with common
data binding use cases:

-   Template repeater. Creates an instance of the template's contents for each item in an array.
-   Array selector. Manages selection state for an array of structured data.
-   Conditional template. Stamps its contents if a given condition is true.
-   Auto-binding template. Allows data binding outside of a Polymer element.

## Template repeater (dom-repeat) {#dom-repeat}

The template repeater is a specialized template that binds to an array.
It creates one instance of the template's contents for each item in the array.
It adds two properties to the binding scope for each instance:

*   `item`. The array item used to create this instance.
*   `index`. The index of `item` in the array. (The `index` value changes if
    the array is sorted or filtered)

The template repeater is a [type-extension custom element](registering-elements#type-extension)
that extends the built-in `<template>` element, so it is written as `<template is="dom-repeat">`.

Example: { .caption }

```
<dom-module id="employee-list">
  <template>

    <div> Employee list: </div>
    <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employees}}">
        <div># <span>{{index}}</span></div>
        <div>First name: <span>{{item.first}}</span></div>
        <div>Last name: <span>{{item.last}}</span></div>
    </template>

  </template>

  <script>
    Polymer({
      is: 'employee-list',
      ready: function() {
        this.employees = [
            {first: 'Bob', last: 'Smith'},
            {first: 'Sally', last: 'Johnson'},
            ...
        ];
      }
    });
  </script>

</dom-module>
```

Notifications for changes to items sub-properties are forwarded to the template
instances, which update via the normal [structured data notification system
](#path-binding).

Mutations to the `items` array itself (`push`, `pop`, `splice`, `shift`,
`unshift`), should be performed using Polymer's
[array mutation methods](properties#array-mutation).
These methods ensure that any elements observing the array are kept in sync.
If you can't avoid using the native `Array.prototype` methods, make sure to
call [`notifySplices`](properties#notifysplices) to ensure that any
elements watching `items` are properly updated.

### Handling events in `dom-repeat` templates {#handling-events}

When handling events generated by a `dom-repeat` template instance, you
frequently want to map the element firing the event to the model data that
generated that item.

When you add a declarative event handler **inside** the `<dom-repeat>` template,
the repeater adds a `model` property to each event sent to the listener. The `model`
is the scope data used to generate the template instance, so the item
data is `model.item`:

```
<dom-module id="simple-menu">

  <template>
    <template is="dom-repeat" id="menu" items="{{menuItems}}">
        <div>
          <span>{{item.name}}</span>
          <span>{{item.ordered}}</span>
          <button on-click="order">Order</button>
        </div>
    </template>
  </template>

  <script>
    Polymer({
      is: 'simple-menu',
      ready: function() {
        this.menuItems = [
            { name: "Pizza", ordered: 0 },
            { name: "Pasta", ordered: 0 },
            { name: "Toast", ordered: 0 }
        ];
      },
      order: function(e) {
        var model = e.model;
        model.set('item.ordered', model.item.ordered+1);
      }
    });
  </script>

</dom-module>
```

The `model` is an instance of `Polymer.Base`, so `set`, `get` and the array
manipulation methods are all available on the `model` object, and should be used
to manipulate the model.

**Note:** The `model` property is **not** added for event listeners registered
imperatively (using `addEventListener`), or listeners added to one of the
`<dom-repeat>` template's parent nodes. In these cases, you can use
the `<dom-repeat>` `modelForElement` method to retrieve the
model data that generated a given element. (There are also corresponding
`itemForElement` and `indexForElement` methods.)
{ .alert .alert-info }


### Filtering and sorting lists

To filter or sort the _displayed_ items in your list, specify a `filter` or
`sort` property on the `dom-repeat` (or both):

*   `filter`. Specifies a filter callback function, that takes a single argument
    (the item) and returns true to display the item, false to omit it.
    Note that this is **similar** to the standard
    `Array` [`filter`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter) API, but the callback only takes a single argument, the array item. For performance reasons, it doesn't include the `index` argument. See [Filtering on array index](#filtering-on-index) for more information.
*   `sort`. Specifies a comparison function following the standard `Array`
    [`sort`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/sort) API.

In both cases, the value can be either a function object, or a string identifying a
function defined on the host element.

By default, the `filter` and `sort` functions only run when one of the
following occurs:

*   The array itself is mutated (for example, by adding or removing items).
*   The `filter` or `sort` function is changed.

To re-run the `filter` or `sort` when an unrelated piece of data changes,
call [`render`](#synchronous-renders). For example, if your element has a
`sortOrder` property that changes how the `sort` function works, you can
call `render` when `sortOrder` changes.

To re-run the `filter` or `sort` functions when certain sub-fields
of `items` change, set the `observe` property to a space-separated list of
`item` sub-fields that should cause the list to be re-filtered or re-sorted.

For example, for a `dom-repeat` with a filter of the following:

```
isEngineer: function(item) {
    return item.type == 'engineer' || item.manager.type == 'engineer';
}
```

Then the `observe` property should be configured as follows:

```
<template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employees}}"
    filter="isEngineer" observe="type manager.type">
```

Changing a `manager.type` field should now cause the list to be re-sorted:

```
this.set('employees.0.manager.type', 'engineer');
```

#### Dynamic sort and filter changes

The `observe` property lets you specify item sub-properties to
observe for filtering and sorting purposes. However, sometimes you want to
dynamically change the sort or filter based on another unrelated value. In
this case, you can use a computed binding to _return_ a dynamic filter or
sort function when one or more dependent properties changes.

```
<dom-module id="employee-search">

  <template>
    <input value="{{searchString::input}}">
    <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employees}}" as="employee"
        filter="{{computeFilter(searchString)}}">
        <div>{{employee.lastname}}, {{employee.firstname}}</div>
    </template>
  </template>

  <script>
    Polymer({
      is: "employee-search",
      computeFilter: function(string) {
        if (!string) {
          // set filter to null to disable filtering
          return null;
        } else {
          // return a filter function for the current search string
          string = string.toLowerCase();
          return function(employee) {
            var first = employee.firstname.toLowerCase();
            var last = employee.lastname.toLowerCase();
            return (first.indexOf(string) != -1 ||
                last.indexOf(string) != -1);
          };
        }
      },
      properties: {
        employees: {
          type: Array,
          value: function() {
            return [
              { firstname: "Jack", lastname: "Aubrey" },
              { firstname: "Anne", lastname: "Elliot" },
              { firstname: "Stepehen", lastname: "Maturin" },
              { firstname: "Emma", lastname: "Woodhouse" }
            ]
          }
        }
      }
    });
  </script>
</dom-module>
```

In this example, whenever the value of the `searchString` property changes,
`computeFilter` is called to compute a new value for the `filter` property.

#### Filtering on array index {#filtering-on-index}

Because of the way Polymer tracks arrays internally, the array
index isn't passed to the filter function. Looking up the array index for an
item is an O(n) operation. Doing so  in a filter function could have
**significant performance impact**.

If you need to look up the array index and are willing to pay the performance penalty,
you can use code like the following:

```
filter: function(item) {
  var index = this.items.indexOf(item);
  ...
}
```

The filter function is called with the `dom-repeat` as the `this` value, so
you can access the original array as `this.items` and use it to look up the index.

This lookup returns the items index in the **original** array, which may not match
the index of the array as displayed (filtered and sorted).

### Nesting dom-repeat templates {#nesting-templates}

When nesting multiple `dom-repeat` templates, you may want to access data
from a parent scope. Inside a `dom-repeat`, you can access any properties available
to the parent scope unless they're hidden by a property in the current scope.

For example, the default `item` and `index` properties added by `dom-repeat`
hide any similarly-named properties in a parent scope.

To access properties from nested `dom-repeat` templates, use the `as` attribute to
assign a different name for the item property. Use the `index-as` attribute to assign a
different name for the index property.

```
<div> Employee list: </div>
<template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employees}}" as="employee">
    <div>First name: <span>{{employee.first}}</span></div>
    <div>Last name: <span>{{employee.last}}</span></div>

    <div>Direct reports:</div>

    <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employee.reports}}" as="report" index-as="report_no">
      <div><span>{{report_no}}</span>.
           <span>{{report.first}}</span> <span>{{report.last}}</span>
      </div>
    </template>
</template>
```

### Forcing synchronous renders {#synchronous-renders}

Call [`render`](/{{{polymer_version_dir}}}/docs/api/dom-repeat#method-render)
to force a `dom-repeat` template to synchronously render any changes to its
data. Normally changes are batched and rendered asynchronously. Synchronous
rendering has a performance cost, but can be useful in a few scenarios:

*   For unit testing, to ensure items have rendered before checking the
    generated DOM.
*   To ensure a list of items have rendered before scrolling to a
    specific item.
*   To re-run the `sort` or `filter` functions when a piece of data changes
    *outside* the array (sort order or filter criteria, for example).

`render` **only** works with changes made with Polymer's
[array mutation methods](properties#array-mutation).
If you or a third-party library mutate the array without Polymer's methods,
you need to call [`notifySplices`](properties#notifysplices) to ensure that any elements
watching the array are properly notified.

### Improve performance for large lists {#large-list-perf}

By default, `dom-repeat` tries to render all of the list items at once. If
you try to use `dom-repeat` to render a very large list of items, the UI may
freeze while it's rendering the list. If you encounter this problem, enable
"chunked" rendering by setting
[`initialCount`](/{{{polymer_version_dir}}}/docs/api/dom-repeat#property-initialCount).
In chunked mode,
`dom-repeat` renders `initialCount` items at first, then renders the rest of
the items incrementally one chunk per animation frame. This lets the UI thread
handle user input between chunks. You can keep track of how many items have
been rendered with the
[`renderedItemCount`](/{{{polymer_version_dir}}}/docs/api/dom-repeat#property-renderedItemCount)
read-only property.

`dom-repeat` adjusts the number of items rendered in each chunk to try and
maintain a target framerate. You can further tune rendering by setting
[`targetFramerate`](/{{{polymer_version_dir}}}/docs/api/dom-repeat#property-targetFramerate).

You can also set a debounce time that must pass before a `filter` or `sort`
function is re-run by setting the
[`delay`](/{{{polymer_version_dir}}}/docs/api/dom-repeat#property-delay)
property.

## Data bind an array selection (array-selector) {#array-selector}

Keeping structured data in sync requires that Polymer understand the path
associations of data being bound.  The `array-selector` element ensures path
linkage when selecting specific items from an array.

The `items` property accepts an array of user data. Call `select(item)`
and `deselect(item)` to update the `selected` property, which may be bound to
other parts of the application. Any changes to sub-fields of the selected
item(s) are kept in sync with items in the `items` array.

The array selector supports either single or multiple selection.
When `multi` is false, `selected` is a property representing the last selected
item.  When `multi` is true, `selected` is an array of selected items.

```
<dom-module id="employee-list">

  <template>

    <div> Employee list: </div>
    <template is="dom-repeat" id="employeeList" items="{{employees}}">
        <div>First name: <span>{{item.first}}</span></div>
        <div>Last name: <span>{{item.last}}</span></div>
        <button on-click="toggleSelection">Select</button>
    </template>

    <array-selector id="selector" items="{{employees}}" selected="{{selected}}" multi toggle></array-selector>

    <div> Selected employees: </div>
    <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{selected}}">
        <div>First name: <span>{{item.first}}</span></div>
        <div>Last name: <span>{{item.last}}</span></div>
    </template>

  </template>

  <script>
    Polymer({
      is: 'employee-list',
      ready: function() {
        this.employees = [
            {first: 'Bob', last: 'Smith'},
            {first: 'Sally', last: 'Johnson'},
            ...
        ];
      },
      toggleSelection: function(e) {
        var item = this.$.employeeList.itemForElement(e.target);
        this.$.selector.select(item);
      }
    });
  </script>

</dom-module>
```


## Conditional templates {#dom-if}

Elements can be conditionally stamped based on a boolean property by wrapping
them in a custom `HTMLTemplateElement` type extension called `dom-if`.  The
`dom-if` template stamps its contents into the DOM only when its `if` property becomes
truthy.

If the `if` property becomes falsy again, by default all stamped elements are hidden
(but remain in the DOM tree). This provides faster performance should the `if`
property become truthy again.  To disable this behavior, set the
`restamp` property to `true`. This results in slower `if` switching behavior as the
elements are destroyed and re-stamped each time.

The following is a simple example to show how conditional templates work. Read below for
guidance on recommended usage of conditional templates.

Example: { .caption }

```
<dom-module id="user-page">

  <template>

    All users will see this:
    <div>{{user.name}}</div>

    <template is="dom-if" if="{{user.isAdmin}}">
      Only admins will see this.
      <div>{{user.secretAdminStuff}}</div>
    </template>

  </template>

  <script>
    Polymer({
      is: 'user-page',
      properties: {
        user: Object
      }
    });
  </script>

</dom-module>
```


Since it is generally much faster to hide and show elements rather than
destroy and recreate them, conditional templates are only useful to save initial
creation cost when the elements being stamped are relatively heavyweight and the
conditional may rarely (or never) be true in given usages.  Otherwise, liberal
use of conditional templates can actually *add* significant runtime performance
overhead.

Consider an app with 4 screens, plus an optional admin screen.  If most users
will use all 4 screens during normal use of the app, it is generally better to
incur the cost of stamping those elements once at startup (where some app
initialization time is expected) and simply hide/show the screens as the user
navigates through the app, rather than destroy and re-create all the elements of
each screen as the user navigates.  Using a conditional template here may be a
poor choice, since although it may save time at startup by stamping only the
first screen, that saved time gets shifted to runtime latency for each user
interaction, since the time to show the second screen will be *slower* as it
must create the second screen from scratch rather than simply showing that
screen.  Hiding/showing elements is as simple as attribute-binding to the
`hidden` attribute (e.g. `<div hidden$="{{!shouldShow}}">`), and does not
require conditional templating at all.

However, using a conditional template may be appropriate in the case of an admin
screen that's only shown to admin users of an app.  Since most users
aren't admins, there may be performance benefits to not burdening most of
the users with the cost of stamping the elements for the admin page, especially
if it is relatively heavyweight.

## Auto-binding templates {#dom-bind}

Polymer data binding is only available in templates that are managed
by Polymer. So data binding works inside an element's local DOM
template, but not for elements placed in the main document.

To use Polymer bindings **without** defining a new custom element,
use the `dom-bind` element.  This template immediately stamps its contents
into the main document. Data bindings in an auto-binding template use the template
itself as the binding scope.

```
<!doctype html>
<html>
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <script src="components/webcomponentsjs/webcomponents-lite.js"></script>
  <link rel="import" href="components/polymer/polymer.html">
  <link rel="import" href="components/iron-ajax/iron-ajax.html">

</head>
<body>

  <!-- Wrap elements with auto-binding template to -->
  <!-- allow use of Polymer bindings in main document -->
  <template id="t" is="dom-bind">

    <iron-ajax url="http://..." last-response="{{data}}" auto></iron-ajax>

    <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{data}}">
        <div><span>{{item.first}}</span> <span>{{item.last}}</span></div>
    </template>

  </template>

</body>
<script>
  var t = document.querySelector('#t');

  // The dom-change event signifies when the template has stamped its DOM.
  t.addEventListener('dom-change', function() {
    // auto-binding template is ready.
  });
</script>
</html>
```

All of the features in `dom-bind` are already available _inside_ a Polymer
element. **Auto-binding templates should only be used _outside_ of a Polymer element.**

## dom-change event {#dom-change}

When one of the template helper elements updates the DOM tree, it fires a `dom-change` event.

In most cases, you should interact with the created DOM by changing the _model data_, not by
interacting directly with the created nodes. For those cases where you need to access the
nodes directly, you can use the `dom-change` event.
