---
layout: default
type: guide
shortname: Docs
title: Data binding helper elements
subtitle: Developer guide
---

{% include toc.html %}


{{site.project_title}} provides a set of custom elements to help with common
data binding use cases:

-   Template repeater. Creates an instance of the template's contents for each item in an array.
-   Array selector. Manages selection state for an array of structured data.
-   Conditional template. Stamps its contents if a given condition is true.
-   Auto-binding template. Allows data binding outside of a {{site.project_title}} element.

## Template repeater (dom-repeat) {#dom-repeat}

The template repeater is a specialized template that binds to an array.
It creates one instance of the template's contents for each item in the array.
It adds two properties to the binding scope for each instance:

*   `item`. The array item used to create this instance.
*   `index`. The index of `item` in the array. (The `index` value changes if 
    the array is sorted or filtered)

The template repeater is a [type-extension custom element](registering-elements.html#type-extension) 
that extends the built-in `<template>` element, so it is written as `<template is="dom-repeat">`.

Example:

    {% raw %}
    <dom-module id="employee-list">
      <template>

        <div> Employee list: </div>
        <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employees}}">
            <div># <span>{{index}}</span></div>
            <div>First name: <span>{{item.first}}</span></div>
            <div>Last name: <span>{{item.last}}</span></div>
        </template>

      </template>

      <script>
        Polymer({
          is: 'employee-list',
          ready: function() {
            this.employees = [
                {first: 'Bob', last: 'Smith'},
                {first: 'Sally', last: 'Johnson'},
                ...
            ];
          }
        });
      </script>

    </dom-module>
    {% endraw %}

Notifications for changes to items sub-properties are forwarded to the template
instances, which update via the normal [structured data notification system
](#path-binding).

Mutations to the `items` array itself (`push`, `pop`, `splice`, `shift`,
`unshift`) must be performed using methods provided on Polymer elements, such
that the changes are observable to any elements bound to the same array in the
tree. For example:

    this.push('employees', { first: 'Jack', last: 'Aubrey' });

### Handling events in `dom-repeat` templates {#handling-events}

When handling events generated by a `dom-repeat` template instance, you 
frequently want to map the element firing the event to the model data that 
generated that item.  

When you add a declarative event handler **inside** the `<dom-repeat>` template,
the repeater adds a `model` property to each event sent to the listener. The `model` 
is the scope data used to generate the template instance, so the item
data is `model.item`:

    {% raw %}
    <dom-module id="simple-menu">

      <template>
        <template is="dom-repeat" id="menu" items="{{menuItems}}">
            <div>
              <span>{{item.name}}</span>
              <span>{{item.ordered}}</span> 
              <button on-click="order">Order</button>
            </div>
        </template>
      </template>

      <script>
        Polymer({
          is: 'simple-menu',
          ready: function() {
            this.menuItems = [
                { name: "Pizza", ordered: 0 },
                { name: "Pasta", ordered: 0 },
                { name: "Toast", ordered: 0 }
            ];
          },
          order: function(e) {
            var model = e.model;
            model.set('item.ordered', model.item.ordered+1);
          }
        });
      </script>

    </dom-module>
    {% endraw %}

The `model` is an instance of `Polymer.Base`, so `set`, `get` and the array
manipulation methods are all available on the `model` object, and should be used
to manipulate the model.

**Note:** The `model` property is **not** added for event listeners registered 
imperatively (using `addEventListener`), or listeners added to one of the
`<dom-repeat>` template's parent nodes. In these cases, you can use
the `<dom-repeat>` `modelForElement` method to retrieve the 
model data that generated a given element. (There are also corresponding 
`itemForElement` and `indexForElement` methods.)
{: .alert .alert-info }


### Filtering and sorting lists

To filter or sort the _displayed_ items in your list, specify a `filter` or 
`sort` property on the `dom-repeat` (or both):

*   `filter`. Specifies a filter callback function following the standard 
    `Array` [`filter`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter) API.
*   `sort`. Specifies a comparison function following the standard `Array` 
    [`sort`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/sort) API.

In both cases, the value can be either a function object, or a string identifying a 
function defined on the host element.

By default, the `filter` and `sort` functions only run when the array itself
is mutated (for example, by adding or removing items).

To re-run the `filter` or `sort` functions when certain sub-fields
of `items` change, set the `observe` property to a space-separated list of
`item` sub-fields that should cause the list to be re-filtered or re-sorted.

For example, for a `dom-repeat` with a filter of the following:

    isEngineer: function(item) {
        return item.type == 'engineer' || item.manager.type == 'engineer';
    }

Then the `observe` property should be configured as follows:

    {% raw %}
    <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employees}}"
        filter="isEngineer" observe="type manager.type">
    {% endraw %}    

Changing a `manager.type` field should now cause the list to be re-sorted:

    this.set('employees.0.manager.type', 'engineer');

### Nesting dom-repeat templates {#nesting-templates}

When nesting multiple `dom-repeat` templates, you may want to access data
from a parent scope. Inside a `dom-repeat`, you can access any properties available
to the parent scope unless they're hidden by a property in the current scope. 

For example, the default `item` and `index` properties added by `dom-repeat`
hide any similarly-named properties in a parent scope.

To access properties from nested `dom-repeat` templates, use the `as` attribute to 
assign a different name for the item property. Use the `index-as` attribute to assign a 
different name for the index property.

    {% raw %}
    <div> Employee list: </div>
    <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employees}}" as="employee">
        <div>First name: <span>{{employee.first}}</span></div>
        <div>Last name: <span>{{employee.last}}</span></div>

        <div>Direct reports:</div>

        <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{employee.reports}}" as="report" index-as="report_no">
          <div><span>{{report_no}}</span>. 
               <span>{{report.first}}</span> <span>{{report.last}}</span>
          </div>
        </template>
    </template>
    {% endraw %}


## Array selector (array-selector) {#array-selector}

Keeping structured data in sync requires that {{site.project_title}} understand the path
associations of data being bound.  The `array-selector` element ensures path
linkage when selecting specific items from an array. The array selector supports
either single or multiple selection.

The `items` property accepts an array of user data. Call `select(item)`
and `deselect(item)` to update the `selected` property, which may be bound to
other parts of the application. Any changes to sub-fields of the selected 
item(s) are kept in sync with items in the `items` array.  

When `multi` is false, `selected` is a property representing the last selected 
item.  When `multi` is true, `selected` is an array of selected items.

    {% raw %}
    <dom-module id="employee-list">

      <template>

        <div> Employee list: </div>
        <template is="dom-repeat" id="employeeList" items="{{employees}}">
            <div>First name: <span>{{item.first}}</span></div>
            <div>Last name: <span>{{item.last}}</span></div>
            <button on-click="toggleSelection">Select</button>
        </template>

        <array-selector id="selector" items="{{employees}}" selected="{{selected}}" multi toggle></array-selector>

        <div> Selected employees: </div>
        <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{selected}}">
            <div>First name: <span>{{item.first}}</span></div>
            <div>Last name: <span>{{item.last}}</span></div>
        </template>

      </template>

      <script>
        Polymer({
          is: 'employee-list',
          ready: function() {
            this.employees = [
                {first: 'Bob', last: 'Smith'},
                {first: 'Sally', last: 'Johnson'},
                ...
            ];
          },
          toggleSelection: function(e) {
            var item = this.$.employeeList.itemForElement(e.target);
            this.$.selector.select(item);
          }
        });
      </script>

    </dom-module>
    {% endraw %}


## Conditional templates {#dom-if}

Elements can be conditionally stamped based on a boolean property by wrapping
them in a custom `HTMLTemplateElement` type extension called `dom-if`.  The
`dom-if` template stamps its contents into the DOM only when its `if` property becomes
truthy.

If the `if` property becomes falsy again, by default all stamped elements are hidden 
(but remain in the DOM tree). This provides faster performance should the `if`
property become truthy again.  To disable this behavior, set the
`restamp` property to `true`. This results in slower `if` switching behavior as the
elements are destroyed and re-stamped each time.

The following is a simple example to show how conditional templates work. Read below for
guidance on recommended usage of conditional templates.

Example:

    {% raw %}
    <dom-module id="user-page">

      <template>

        All users will see this:
        <div>{{user.name}}</div>

        <template is="dom-if" if="{{user.isAdmin}}">
          Only admins will see this.
          <div>{{user.secretAdminStuff}}</div>
        </template>

      </template>

      <script>
        Polymer({
          is: 'user-page',
          properties: {
            user: Object
          }
        });
      </script>

    </dom-module>
    {% endraw %}


Since it is generally much faster to hide and show elements rather than
destroy and recreate them, conditional templates are only useful to save initial
creation cost when the elements being stamped are relatively heavyweight and the
conditional may rarely (or never) be true in given usages.  Otherwise, liberal
use of conditional templates can actually *add* significant runtime performance
overhead.

Consider an app with 4 screens, plus an optional admin screen.  If most users
will use all 4 screens during normal use of the app, it is generally better to
incur the cost of stamping those elements once at startup (where some app
initialization time is expected) and simply hide/show the screens as the user
navigates through the app, rather than destroy and re-create all the elements of
each screen as the user navigates.  Using a conditional template here may be a
poor choice, since although it may save time at startup by stamping only the
first screen, that saved time gets shifted to runtime latency for each user
interaction, since the time to show the second screen will be *slower* as it
must create the second screen from scratch rather than simply showing that
screen.  Hiding/showing elements is as simple as attribute-binding to the
`hidden` attribute (e.g. `<div hidden$="{{!shouldShow}}">`), and does not
require conditional templating at all.

However, using a conditional template may be appropriate in the case of an admin
screen that's only shown to admin users of an app.  Since most users
aren't admins, there may be performance benefits to not burdening most of
the users with the cost of stamping the elements for the admin page, especially
if it is relatively heavyweight.

## Auto-binding templates {#dom-bind}

{{site.project_title}} data binding is only available in templates that are managed
by {{site.project_title}}. So data binding works inside an element's local DOM
template, but not for elements placed in the main document.

To use {{site.project_title}} bindings **without** defining a new custom element, 
use the `dom-bind` element.  This template immediately stamps its contents
into the main document. Data bindings in an auto-binding template use the template 
itself as the binding scope.

    {% raw %}
    <!doctype html>
    <html>
    <head>
      <meta charset="utf-8">
      <script src="components/webcomponentsjs/webcomponents-lite.js"></script>
      <link rel="import" href="components/polymer/polymer.html">
      <link rel="import" href="components/iron-ajax/iron-ajax.html">

    </head>
    <body>

      <!-- Wrap elements with auto-binding template to -->
      <!-- allow use of Polymer bindings in main document -->
      <template id="t" is="dom-bind">

        <iron-ajax url="http://..." last-response="{{data}}" auto></iron-ajax>

        <template is="dom-repeat" items="{{data}}">
            <div><span>{{item.first}}</span> <span>{{item.last}}</span></div>
        </template>

      </template>

    </body>
    <script>
      var t = document.querySelector('#t');
      
      // The dom-change event signifies when the template has stamped its DOM.
      t.addEventListener('dom-change', function() {
        // auto-binding template is ready.
      });
    </script>
    </html>
    {% endraw %}

All of the features in `dom-bind` are already available _inside_ a {{site.project_title}}
element. **Auto-binding templates should only be used _outside_ of a {{site.project_title}} element.**

## dom-change event {#dom-change}

When one of the template helper elements updates the DOM tree, it fires a `dom-change` event.

In most cases, you should interact with the created DOM by changing the _model data_, not by 
interacting directly with the created nodes. For those cases where you need to access the 
nodes directly, you can use the `dom-change` event. 

